There's a worldwide effort to predict the effects of coronavirus given different courses of societal action, but there's been less focus on the risks of individual actions.  With the climate crisis, we have both global predictions and ways to gauge individuals' impacts; a person's carbon footprint is quantifiable.  With this pandemic, however, we agree that social distancing is crucial, but personal impact isn't quantified.  As every person strikes a balance between isolation and normalcy - few people simply never go outside - it would help to have some way to gauge just how bad social interaction is.

One way to get a rough sense of the effects of different actions is with simple models of disease spread through a population.  As a first stab at a calculation, consider a population of $N$ people of which $c$ currently have a disease.  This disease shows no symptoms, so infected people don't know to isolate, and it never goes away - these $c$ people are contagious forever.  As a model for spreading, imagine people interact in randomly-drawn pairs, and if one person has the disease and the other doesn't, the first will give it to the second.

It's clear from the start that the whole population's eventually going to be infected, but one thing we can quantify is *how many people get the disease earlier than they would've otherwise if one person doesn't isolate.*  Every infected person's going to have a number of people downstream from them including people they've infected, people those people have infected, and so on.  In this model, people downstream of you would've stayed healthy longer if you'd isolated.  Because all the $N - c$ uninfected people will eventually be downstream from one of the $c$ infected people, each of the $c$ infected people expects to have $\frac{N - c}{c}$ people downstream on average.

Now imagine person $i$ and person $j$ have contact.  If one is infected and the other is uninfected, which happens with new-case probability $p_{\text{nc}} = \frac{2c(N - c)}{N^2}$, a new infected person is created; there are now $c + 1$ sick people, and the extra infected person has on average $\frac{N - c - 1}{c + 1}$ people downstream who will get sick sooner than they would've if person $i$ and person $j$ hadn't interacted.  Including the one of those two who got sick, that's $x = \frac{N - c - 1}{c + 1} + 1 = \frac{N}{c + 1}$ infections sped up per new case.  Multiplying by the probability and assuming that $N, c \gg 1$ gives $p_{\text{nc}} x = \frac{2c(N - c)}{N^2}\frac{N}{c + 1} \approx \frac{2(N - c)}{N}$.  When $c \ll N$, like it is for the coronavirus, this is roughly $2$; in this model, interacting with a random person you could've avoided leads to two cases of the disease happening earlier than they would've otherwise.

This isn't really how coronavirus works, though; covid doesn't last forever, and people with symptoms can isolate.  To make the model more realistic, let's say there are $c$ contagious people who have the disease but either haven't shown symptoms yet or won't ever and $r$ people who are either currently showing symptoms and isolating or have already gotten better, so they can't infect anyone else and are $r$emoved from the calculation.  For now, we'll still assume every person eventually gets the disease.  The new probability of a new case when two people interact is $p'_{\text{nc}} = \frac{2c(N - c - r)}{N^2}$, and the expected number of downstream people from a new infected person (plus that person) is $x' = \frac{N - r}{c + 1}$.  The expected number of accelerated infections per interaction is $p'_{\text{nc}}x' = \frac{2(N - r)(N - c - r)}{N^2}$.  For the coronavirus, $r,c \ll N$ - only a small fraction of the population has been infected - so this simplifies to 2 again.  Even allowing for isolation and resistance, interacting with a random person leads to, on average, two cases of coronavirus happening earlier than they would've.

So far, we've assumed that everybody's going to get the coronavirus.  That's not likely, though; in a worst-case scenario, once ~70% of the population has been infected, herd immunity should extinguish the virus, and before then either a vaccine or extensive contact tracing could stop the virus' spread.  If the end of the pandemic is herd immunity, individual actions will affect when people get the disease, but the total number of cases will mostly be set by the herd immunity threshold.  However, if a vaccine stops the spread, for example, timing matters more.  Suppose that 1000 people in a large state currently have the virus, and by the time a vaccine stops the pandemic 100000 new people have gotten it.  If the population's much bigger than 100000, the cases don't interact, and we can estimate that if there 1001 contagious people to begin with, there would've been 100100 new cases instead; every current case causes 100 future cases.  As before, let's say $N$ is the population, $r$ people are recovered or symptomatic, $c$ people are contagious and asymptomatic, and $s$ people are currently uninfected but will eventually get the disease.  Assuming $s$ is small compared to the total number of uninfected people as discussed ($s \ll N - r - c$), the average current infection causes $y = s/c$ preventable cases.  The probability of an interaction generating a new case is still $p'_{\text{nc}} = \frac{2c(N - c - r)}{N^2}$, which means that, in this model of a terminating pandemic, each extra interaction between strangers causes $p'_{\text{nc}} y = \frac{2s(N - c - r)}{N^2} \approx \frac{2s}{N}$ preventable cases.  This means that, optimistically, if ~10% of the population eventually gets coronavirus and a much smaller percentage has it now, every unnecessary interaction with a stranger will cause ~0.2 extra cases of the disease.

This model has a few key shortcomings.  First, interactions aren't all or nothing; most interactions fall between six feet of separation and repeatedly coughing on each other, so the final numbers should be reduced proportional to how likely the interaction in question is to spread coronavirus.  Second, actual estimates of the number of people who'll get coronavirus are often over 50%, in which case cases interfere with each other and the final result will be less than $\frac{2s}{N}$.  A slightly more complicated model might be able to account for that somewhat.  Third, interactions aren't random, and interacting with someone you've interacted with before isn't as bad as talking to a stranger.

All of these are reasons that the calculations above are overestimates, erring on the side of caution, which makes them seem useful as upper bounds.  Assuming a 1% fatality rate and a 50% infection rate before the pandemic ends, these calculations give that a close interaction with a random person will cause .01 deaths on average.  Even though it's an overestimate, this number's usable; getting close to people in a hospital for a medical procedure is probably worth the risk, but high-fiving a stranger or sitting next to someone at a bar probably isn't.  It's easier to break quarantine when the risks seem nebulous and impersonal, so a number like .01 deaths/interaction seems worth keeping in mind.
